ELE 312: MEASUREMENT AND INSTRUMENTATION Lecture One
1.0 Introduction
Measurement is the process of obtaining a quantitative value for a physical quantity, such as length,
temperature, pressure, or time. It involves comparing an unknown quantity with a standard unit of
measurement. The primary goal of measurement is to determine the magnitude, size, or amount of
a particular property or phenomenon. Instrumentation refers to the devices, tools, and systems used
to measure, monitor, and control physical quantities. It encompasses the design, development, and
application of instruments that facilitate measurement. Instrumentation is concerned with the
creation and use of instruments to accurately and reliably measure and control physical quantities.
It often involves the integration of sensors, transducers, signal processing, and data acquisition
systems.
1.1 Classification of Instruments
Instruments may be classified according to the following:
i. Electrical and Electronic Instruments. Electrical instruments are devices that measure or
control electrical quantities such as voltage, current, power, and resistance. These instruments
typically consist of passive components like resistors, capacitors, inductors, and electromechanical
elements such as coils and magnets. They usually operate on the principles of electromagnetism
and electrostatics. They often involve mechanical movement to indicate measurements, such as
the needle in an analog ammeter or voltmeter. In contrast, electronic instruments are devices that
use electronic components and circuits to measure, process, and control electrical and nonelectrical quantities. They often involve the use of active components like transistors, diodes, and
integrated circuits along with passive components. Example include digital multimeter,
oscilloscope, spectrum analyzer etc.
ii. Analogue and Digital Instruments. An analogue instrument is the instrument that uses
analogue signal to display the magnitude of quantity under measurement. The digital instrument
uses digital signal to indicate the results of measurement in digital form
iii. Absolute and Secondary Instruments. Absolute instruments are instruments which give the
value of the quantity to be measured in terms of the constants of the instrument and their deflection
only. No previous calibration or comparison is necessary in their case. The example of such an
2
instrument is tangent galvanometer, which gives the value of the current in terms of the tangent of
deflection produced by the current, the radius and number of turns of wire used and the horizontal
component of earth’s field.
Secondary instruments are instruments in which the value of electrical quantity to be measured
can be determined from the deflection of the instruments only when they have been pre-calibrated
by comparison with an absolute instrument. These are the instruments that are more generally used
in everyday work. The use of the absolute instruments being merely confined within laboratories,
as standardizing instruments.
1.2 Classification of Secondary Instruments
Secondary instruments can be classified into;
i) Indicating Instruments: These are instruments which indicate the instantaneous value of the
electrical quantity being measured at the time at which it is being measured. Their indications
are given by pointers moving over a calibrated scale. Ordinary ammeters, voltmeters and
wattmeter belong to this class.
ii) Recording Instruments: These are instruments which give a continuous record or the
variations of such a quantity over selected period of time. The moving system of the
instruments carries an inked pen which rests lightly on a chart or graph, that is moved at a
uniform and low speed, in a direction perpendicular to that of the direction of the pen. The path
traced out by the pen presents a continuous record of the variations in the deflection of the
instrument.
iii) Controlling Instruments: These are widely used in industrial processes. Their function is to
control the quantity being measured with the help of information fed back to them by
monitoring devices. This class forms the basis of automatic control systems (automation)
which are extensively employed in science and technology.
1.3 Essentials of Indicating Instruments
Indicating instruments are those which indicate the value of the quantity that is being measured at
the time at which it is being measured. Such instruments consist essentially of a pointer which
moves over a calibrated scale and which is attached to a moving system pivoted in jeweled
bearings. The moving system is subjected to the following torques;
3
1. A deflecting (or operating) torque
2. A controlling (or restoring) torque
3. A damping torque
1.3.1 Deflecting Torque
The deflecting torque (𝑇𝑑) is produced by utilizing one of the many physical effects of an electric
current or potential. The effects generally utilized include; magnetic effect, electrodynamic effect,
electromagnetic effect, thermal effect etc. The deflecting torque causes the moving system (and
hence the pointer attached to it) to move from its zero position.
1.3.2 Controlling Torque
The deflection of the moving system would be indefinite if there were no controlling or restoring
torque. This torque opposes the deflecting torque and increases with the deflection of the moving
system. The pointer is brought to rest at a position where the two opposing torques are equal. The
deflecting torque ensures that currents of different magnitude shall produce deflection of the
moving system in proportion to their size. Without such a torque, the pointer would swing over to
the maximum deflected position irrespective of the magnitude of the current to be measured.
Moreover, in the absence of a restoring torque, the pointer once deflected, would not return to its
zero position on removing the current. The controlling or restoring or balancing torque in
indicating instruments is obtained either by a spring or by gravity