 Instrument Transformers
The d.c. circuits when large currents are to be measured, it is usual to use low-range ammeters
with suitable shunts. For measuring high voltages, low-range voltmeters are used with high
resistances connected in series with them. But it is neither convenient nor practical to use this
method with alternating current and voltage instruments. For this purpose, specially constructed
accurate ratio instrument transformers are employed in conjunction with standard low-range AC
instruments. Their purpose is to reduce the line current or supply voltage to a value small enough
to be easily measured with meters of moderate size and capacity. In other words, they are used for
extending the range of AC ammeters and voltmeters. Instruments transformers are of two types:
i) Current transformers (CT)
ii) Potential or Voltage transformers (VT)
Advantages of using instrument transformers for range extension of AC meters are as follows:
1. The instrument is insulated from the line voltage; hence it can be grounded.
2. The cost of the instrument (or meter) together with the instrument transformer is less than that
of the instrument alone if it were to be insulated for high voltages.
3. It is possible to achieve standardization of instruments and meters at secondary ratings of 100–
120 volts and 5 or 1 amperes.
4. If necessary, several instruments can be operated from a single transformer and 5 power
consumed in the measuring circuits is low.
In using instrument transformers for current (or voltage) measurements, we must know the ratio
of primary current (or voltage) to the secondary current (or voltage). These ratios give us the
multiplying factor for finding the primary values from the instrument readings on the secondary side.
4.1 Current Transformer
The current transformer (CT) is used for measurement of electric currents. When current in a
circuit is too high to directly apply to measuring instruments, a current transformer produces a reduced current accurately proportional to the current in the circuit, which can be conveniently
connected to measuring and recording instruments. It used in conjunction with current measuring
devices, its primary winding is designed to be connected in series with the line. It is necessary that
the impedance of the primary winding be made as small as possible. The secondary winding
consists of more turns than the primary winding. The ratio of primary to the secondary current is
inversely proportional to the ratio of primary to secondary turns. This transformer is usually stepup transformer in terms of primary to secondary turn ratio.
In current transformer the load impedance or burden on the secondary is very small, so the current
transformer operates on short-circuit conditions. The current through the secondary winding
depends upon the current flowing in the primary winding. A current transformer also isolates the
measuring instruments from what may be very high voltage in the monitored circuit. Current
transformers are commonly used in metering and protective relays in the electrical power industry.
Figure 3.31 show the circuit of current transformer. As seen from the figure the primary winding
of the transformer is connected in series with the line carrying high current. The secondary of the
transformer is made up of a large number of turns of fine wire having small cross-section area.
This is connected to the coil of normal range ammeter.
4.3 Potential Transformer
It’s also called Voltage Transformer (VT). The potential transformer is used for measurement of
high voltages by means of low range voltmeter. Both the primary and secondary windings are
wound on a high-grade steel, low voltage winding kept next to the earth core and the high voltage
winding is on the outside. They reduce the voltage to a reasonable operating value. Primary
winding consists of large numbers of turns while the secondary has a smaller number of turns. The
primary is connected across the high voltage line while secondary is connected to the low range
voltmeter coil. The connection of potential transformer is shown in Fig. 4.1. The potential
transformer is always a step-down transformer.
As shown in Fig. 4.1, the voltage being measured connect across the primary winding which has
large number of turns and connected across the circuit. The secondary winding, which has much
smaller number of turns, is coupled magnetically through the magnetic circuit to the primary winding. The turn ratio is adjusted that secondary voltage is 110V when full-rated primary voltage
is applied to the primary.